feat: add adr 201 (#204)
decentraland/adr: content/ADR-201-lambdas-wearables-API-analysis.md

---
layout: adr
adr: 201
title: Lambdas Wearables API Analysis
date: 2020-04-03
status: Draft
type: RFC
spdx-license: CC0-1.0
authors:
  - pedrotambo
---

## Abstract

> The Explorer uses the Lambdas API `/collections/wearables` to get Wearables. This API sometimes has bad performance, it has an ill design and the handrail between the Explorer and the Content-Server through Lambdas might not be necessary. In this document we review the functionalities of this API and analize solutions to this problems. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Explorer uses the Lambdas API `/collections/wearables` to get Wearables. This API sometimes has bad performance, it has an ill design and the handrail between the Explorer and the Content Server through Lambdas might not be necessary. In this document we review the functionalities of this API and analyze solutions to these problems. 
```

## Context, Reach & Prioritization

> During the last MVFW, a report of bad performance APIs was done. Among those APIs, there was the Lambdas API `GET /collections/wearables`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
During the last MVFW, bad performance of some APIs was reported. Among those APIs, there was the Lambdas endpoint `GET /collections/wearables`.
```

> During the last MVFW, bad performance of some APIs was reported. Among those APIs, there was the Lambdas endpoint `GET /collections/wearables`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
During the last MVFW, some APIs suffered from performance degradation. Among those APIs, there was the Lambdas endpoint `GET /collections/wearables`.
```

> ### API Funcionality

Reviewer 3: typo: 
```suggestion
### API Functionality
```

> First, a review of the functionalities of the API will be covered. The API, based on the request filters, gets the wearables from the content server, applies a small transform and returns the result to the client.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
First, a review of the functionalities of the API will be covered. The API, based on the request filters, gets the wearables from the Content Server, applies a small transform and returns the result to the client.
```

#### Request filters
The API allows three query parameters:

> - `wearableIds`: A list of wearable URNs that the client requests. Just ask for them to the content server and apply the transform. Sometimes many wearables are requested that the url string exceeds the maximum allowed.

Reviewer 3: I'd replace _Just ask for them to the content server_ for **Just ask the content server for them.**

> - `wearableIds`: A list of wearable URNs that the client requests. Just ask for them to the content server and apply the transform. Sometimes many wearables are requested that the url string exceeds the maximum allowed.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- `wearableIds`: A list of wearable URNs that the client requests. Just ask the content-server for them and apply the transform. However, in some cases, when a large number of wearables are requested, the resulting URL string can exceed the maximum length allowed.
```

> - `wearableIds`: A list of wearable URNs that the client requests. Just ask for them to the content server and apply the transform. Sometimes many wearables are requested that the url string exceeds the maximum allowed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `wearableIds`: A list of wearable URNs that the client requests. It just asks the content server for them and then applies the transformation. Sometimes many wearables are requested that the url string exceeds the maximum allowed.
```

> - `collectionIds`: A list of collection URNs that the client requests. For a `collectionId` is "off-chain" (base-avatars only), request the wearables directly to the content-server. If a *collectionId* is "on-chain" (collections v1 and v2), request to The Graph the wearable URNs from that collection, and then request them to the content-server. No third-party collections are included. Note: for the base-avatars collection it has a fixed list in a file listing all the urns.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `collectionIds`: A list of collection URNs that the client requests. When a `collectionId` is "off-chain" (base-avatars only), it requests the wearables directly to the Content Server. If a `collectionId` is "on-chain" (collections v1 and v2), it runs queries on The Graph using the wearable URNs from that collection, and then it fetches them from the Content Server. No third-party collections are included. Note: for the base-avatars collection it has a fixed list in a file listing all the urns.
```

> - `textSearch`: A string value that is used to query The Graph. On-chain wearables have a metadata field called "searchText" that can have anything that is used for filtering. In some cases it has useful information but in other cases it has non sense info.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `textSearch`: A string value that is used to query The Graph. On-chain wearables have a metadata field called "searchText" that can have anything that is used for filtering. In some cases it has useful information but in other cases it has no meaningful info.
```

> #### Transform: Wearables from the content-server to the Client

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Transform: Wearables from the Content Server to the Client
```

> 1. First the wearable data from the content-server is retrieved with this [schema](https://github.com/decentraland/schemas/blob/main/src/platform/entity.ts#L28-L37).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. First the wearable data from the Content Server is retrieved with this [schema](https://github.com/decentraland/schemas/blob/main/src/platform/entity.ts#L28-L37).
```

2. Then only the `metadata` of type [Wearable](https://github.com/decentraland/schemas/blob/main/src/platform/item/wearable/wearable.ts#L18-L26) is returned to the client, but a small transform is applied: the contents are extended with full url.

> ![Entity](/resources/ADR-201/entity-transform.png)

Reviewer 3: I think this is not rendering, should it be?:
```suggestion
![Entity](/public/resources/ADR-201/entity-transform.png)
```

Reviewer: It is, the rendering process fixes the url correctly.

### Explorer use cases of the API
The API has many funcionalites, but the Explorer doesn't use all of them. After reviewing the `unity-renderer` repository, two use cases were recognized (check with Explorer Team): 

> 1. `wearableIds`: The Explorer request multiple wearables by URN. It reads from the user profiles the wearables that the user is wearing and request them. Note that the user can wear wearables from different collections.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. `wearableIds`: The Explorer requests multiple wearables by URN. From the user profiles it reads the wearables that the user is wearing and request them. Note that the user can wear wearables from different collections.
```

> 2. `collectionIds='urn:decentraland:off-chain:base-avatars'`: It uses the API functionality of requesting items from a collection but **always** for the base-avatar one. It should be because it is always needed for configuering the backpack were the base avatars are always availables.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
2. `collectionIds='urn:decentraland:off-chain:base-avatars'`: It uses the API functionality of requesting items from a collection but **always** for the base-avatar one. It should be because it is always needed for configuring the backpack were the base avatars are always available.
```

## Solution Space Exploration

### Potential Solution 1: Redesign and Implement only used functionalities in Lamb2

> Instead of having a single API supporting multiple funcionalities, a new API schema is proposed only for the two use cases needed by the explorer:

Reviewer 3: typo
```suggestion
Instead of having a single API supporting multiple functionalities, a new API schema is proposed only for the two use cases needed by the explorer:
```

> Instead of having a single API supporting multiple funcionalities, a new API schema is proposed only for the two use cases needed by the explorer:

Reviewer: "a new API schema"? (what is that). Or should we say 2 new endpoints are proposed?

Author: updated

> - `POST /wearables { body: { ids: string[]}}`

Reviewer 4: nitpick: why body? it seems to me we can send `{ ids: [] }` directly

>   It receives in the POST request body a list of wanted ids and it returns the wearables for that urns.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  It receives in the POST request body a list of wanted ids and it returns the wearables for those urns.
```

> - `GET /wearables/collections/:collectionId` (pageable)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `GET /wearables/collections/:collectionId` (paginated)
```

  
  It receives a collectionId and it returns the wearables within that collection.

> - Research if the functionality of searching wearables by `textSearch` is used in some other service and implement `POST /wearables/search { body: { textSearch: string }}`

Author: Yes

### Potential Solution 2: Explorer directly hits the Content-Server

> Are these functionalities worthy enough to have a handrail between the Explorer and Content-Server through Lambdas?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Are these functionalities worthy enough to have a handrail between the Explorer and Content Server through Lambdas?
```

> - For the use case 1, request all the ids to the Content Server and use it as it is.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- For the use case 1, request all the ids to the Content Server and use them as-is.
```

2. Then only the `metadata` of type [Wearable](https://github.com/decentraland/schemas/blob/main/src/platform/item/wearable/wearable.ts#L18-L26) is returned to the client, but a small transform is applied: the contents are extended with full url.

![Entity](/resources/ADR-201/entity-transform.png)

### Explorer use cases of the API
The API has many funcionalites, but the Explorer doesn't use all of them. After reviewing the `unity-renderer` repository, two use cases were recognized (check with Explorer Team): 
1. `wearableIds`: The Explorer requests multiple wearables by URN. From the user profiles it reads the wearables that the user is wearing and request them. Note that the user can wear wearables from different collections.
2. `collectionIds='urn:decentraland:off-chain:base-avatars'`: It uses the API functionality of requesting items from a collection but **always** for the base-avatar one. It should be because it is always needed for configuring the backpack where the base avatars are always available.

## Solution Space Exploration

### Solution: Explorer directly hits the Content Server

> Are these functionalities (strings concatenation mostly) currently worthy enough to have a handrail between the Explorer and Content Server through Lambdas?

Reviewer 5: Can you confirm that the only transformation that is doing this handrail is to concatenate `peerContentUrl` before some fields (`thumbnail`, `image`, `contents`, etc.)?

Author: I have reasons to believe that in the past this Lambdas did more things as the Content Server didn't exposed the endpoint that i mentioned POST /entities/active. But now, with that new endpoint, it doesn't make much sense.

> The Content Server provides the API `POST /entities/active { pointers: string[], ids: string[] }` for requesting multiples entities (that was not available at the time of the Lambdas API creation). The returned entities won't have the transform currently provided by Lambdas, so the Explorer will have to concatenate the Content Server url to the hashes of the contents.

Author: The wearable `urns`. The same thing that currently goes to Lambdas as `wearableIds`.

> The Content Server provides the API `POST /entities/active { pointers: string[], ids: string[] }` for requesting multiples entities (that was not available at the time of the Lambdas API creation). The returned entities won't have the transform currently provided by Lambdas, so the Explorer will have to concatenate the Content Server url to the hashes of the contents.

Reviewer 5: Ok, and then... the `ids` param?

> The Content Server provides the API `POST /entities/active { pointers: string[], ids: string[] }` for requesting multiples entities (that was not available at the time of the Lambdas API creation). The returned entities won't have the transform currently provided by Lambdas, so the Explorer will have to concatenate the Content Server url to the hashes of the contents.

Author: The `ids` param means the `entityId`'s of the entities. You can use the endpoint without setting the ids.

- For the use case 1, request all the wearable urns to the Content Server using this API and use them as-is.
- For the use case 2, have a fixed list of base-avatars ids (what currently Lambdas has) and request them to the Content Server or use new endpoint `GET entities/active/collections/urn:decentraland:off-chain:base-avatars` to get all the base-avatars and cache them.

#### Benefits of this solution
- Reduces traffic to Lambdas server.
- Reduces overall request time for the Explorer.
- Helps identify which specific functionality is having performance degradation.
- Improves API maintainability and debugging.
- Enables the possibility of reducing Lambdas endpoints in order to enhance Decentraland protocol robusticity.

> ### Alternative Solution: Redesign and Implement only used functionalities in Lamb2

Author: Split the current 3 functionalities that only one Lambdas endpoint offers, in three different endpoints in Lamb2. Each functionality makes different things, it's not just filtering, sorting or a small thing.

> ### Alternative Solution: Redesign and Implement only used functionalities in Lamb2

Reviewer 5: And these new lamnd2 endpoints would apply also the url's concatenations in the result? or it is something that the client should keep doing like in the Solution 1?

> ### Alternative Solution: Redesign and Implement only used functionalities in Lamb2

Author: In the case of implementing them on Lamb2, it would do the concatenation. If not, it would do nothing
